SQL

    Given a database and a series of tables demonstrate the ability to return data from the given database by writing SQL query statements.
    Demonstrate how to use aggregates within a SQL query to aggregate data from rows and columns.
    Demonstrate how to join three separate tables using a JOIN table by joining on a column.
    Demonstrate how to solve more complicated problems using a SELF JOIN to extract multiple types of information from the same table.
    Know the basic Postgres commands to interact with the Postgres API via your terminal.

Migrations

    Given a resource, demonstrate how to create a new table in Rails.
    Identify the file that will show you the effect of all the migrations that have been run so far.
    Identify the proper way to change the schema of a Rails application.
    Given an existing Rails project, demonstrate how to change a column in a given table.
    Given an existing Rails project, demonstrate how to add columns, indexes, and foreign key constraints to a given table.

Associations

    Identify the role of associations in a Rails model.
    Given a Rails project with two associated models, write belongs_to and has_many associations relating the two.
    Identify which Rails model gets the belongs_to association.
    Demonstrate knowledge of which variables to refer to for the primary_key, foreign_key, and class_name for each association.
    Given a Rails project with models and a has_many or belongs_to association, write a has_many :through association to access data through another model.
    Identify the differences between a has_many :through and a has_one association.
    Demonstrate when it is appropriate to add options such as dependent: :destroy and optional: true to an association.

Active Record queries

    Given a Rails project, demonstrate how to write methods utilizing complex Active Record queries.
    Use aggregates with Active Record.
    Write Active Record queries using multiple where statements.
    Write Active Record queries using group with columns defined in select.
    Use the pluck method with Active Record to return ids.
